---
title: Comparison Sort
---

# Comparison Sort (SORT):

Given a sequence of elements of any (uniform) type and a
comparison function over the elements, sort the elements into
ascending order.  The elements consists of a key and possible
auxiliary data, and the comparison function must define a total order
over the keys.  The sort need not be stable.  The algorithm must be
comparison based.

### Default Input Distributions

The distributions are as follows:

- Double-precision floating-point numbers generated uniformly at
  random from the range [0:1].  
Should be generated with:  
`randomSeq -t double <n> <filename>`

- Double-precision floating-point numbers generated at random with
repeats appearing in an *exponential* distribution.  
Should be generated with:  
`exptSeq -t double <n> <filename>`

- Double-precision floating-point numbers from an *almost-sorted*
distribution.  
Should be generated with:  
`almostSortedSeq -t double <n> <filename>`

- Pairs of double-precision floating-point numbers each generated
uniformly at random from the range [0:1].  To be sorted on just the
first element of the pair.  
Should be generated with:  
`randomSeq -t double <n> <tmpfile>`  
`addDataSeq -t double <tmpfile> <filename>`

- Strings from a tri-gram distribution, as generated by the generator  
`trigramSeq <n> <filename>`

The large size is n = 100 million, and the small size is n = 10
million.

### Input and Output File Formats 

The input and output data need to be in the [sequence file format](../fileFormats/sequence.html),
both with the same element type, which can be pairs.

The output file 
must be in sorted order with respect to the given comparison function. 
 
